[Amit Varma]: I had a bad dream the other night.
[Amit Varma]: I dreamed I was naked.
[Amit Varma]: Now being naked in public is a common dream people have and some might even find it pleasurable.
[Amit Varma]: But I wasn't in public.
[Amit Varma]: I was in a bathroom somewhere as the white marble tiles below me made obvious and I wasn't
[Amit Varma]: alone.
[Amit Varma]: Alongside me, I suddenly realized, were two other men in a similar state of undress.
[Amit Varma]: One was tall and lanky, the other was kind of stocky.
[Amit Varma]: I suddenly recognized them, Amitabh Bachchan and Amit Shah, the other two really famous
[Amit Varma]: Amits in this country.
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Bachchan was singing, Rang barse bheegey chunaru wali rang barse, while Mr. Shah was
[Amit Varma]: looking at me rather grimly, as if it was written on my forehead that I haven't got
[Amit Varma]: an Aadhaar card yet.
[Amit Varma]: Suddenly we became wet, a blast of water came at us from the left side of the bathroom and
[Amit Varma]: as I turned, I saw that there stood Narendra Modi, fully dressed, in a pinstripe suit with
[Amit Varma]: my name on it, holding a gigantic garden hose and he was spraying us with water.
[Amit Varma]: Modi ji, I said alarmed, what are you doing?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, hello Amit, he said, and Amit, and Amit, I am bathing you guys, I am personally setting
[Amit Varma]: an example under my new government scheme, the Swachh Amit Abhiyan, all Amits in India
[Amit Varma]: must be cleaned, you should see the cess I am charging for it, muha ha ha ha.
[Amit Varma]: The Swachh Amit Abhiyan, I asked, what's that?
[Amit Varma]: It's a centrally sponsored government scheme, the Swachh Amit Abhiyan and after your bath,
[Amit Varma]: you will go to school under another centrally sponsored government scheme, the Varma Shiksha
[Amit Varma]: Yojana, where you will be taught to behave yourself, muha ha ha ha, muha ha ha ha.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen, I am your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: As you may have understood from the bad dream I just told you about, I really don't like
[Amit Varma]: centrally sponsored government schemes, but why?
[Amit Varma]: To discuss the unseen effects of such schemes, I have with me in the studio, Pranay Kotasthane,
[Amit Varma]: my colleague in the magazine Pragati and a fellow at the Takshashila Institution, Pranay,
[Guest]: welcome to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit, good to be here again.
[Amit Varma]: Raj Bharat Abhiyan, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Pradhan Mantri Gram Sarak Yojana, these sound
[Amit Varma]: like such incredible schemes with golden intentions at their heart.
[Amit Varma]: But you have an issue with centrally sponsored government schemes like all three of these
[Amit Varma]: and many others.
[Amit Varma]: Can you first tell me and my listeners, what are centrally sponsored government schemes?
[Guest]: Good note to start with Amit, good intentions never make good policy or that's not the sufficient
[Guest]: condition anyways.
[Guest]: So yeah, let's go back to what these schemes are.
[Guest]: So essentially, in the Indian federal system, you have governments at three levels.
[Guest]: And at each of these three levels, governments spend money on various services.
[Guest]: And each of these three levels also earn some money.
[Guest]: So by these three levels, you mean center state, center state and the local governments,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So now, as it happens, the amount that these governments spend is always more than the
[Guest]: amount that they earn.
[Guest]: And because governments are not households or companies, they can still survive, even
[Guest]: though they run deficits.
[Guest]: So what do they do to make up for this deficit?
[Guest]: One they take debts.
[Guest]: So you have foreign debts, you also have debts from one government to the other.
[Guest]: And the other way that governments engage is by supporting some other level of government.
[Guest]: So how that happens in India is, so now we have the state government, state government
[Guest]: will get some money, which is something like a cash transfer, which is in public finance
[Amit Varma]: literature, it is called general purpose from the central government from the union government.
[Guest]: So that is just like I am giving you cash, you can do whatever you want to do with it.
[Guest]: So now, this type of thing is formulaic based.
[Guest]: So it is determined by something called as a finance commission, and it just comes to
[Guest]: the state government.
[Guest]: Now, the objective of such transfer is basically you want to have comparable levels of public
[Guest]: services at comparable tax rates across across the country.
[Guest]: So this is sort of that cash component of the money which is given.
[Guest]: The other part and that is what the topic of today's discussion is something which is
[Guest]: called discretionary transfers.
[Guest]: Now these transfers or these, this money is meant for specific areas.
[Guest]: So this money is not meant for you, it's not a cash transfer, think of it as a voucher.
[Guest]: So the central government gives these vouchers to the state governments to be used on things
[Guest]: like swachhata or things like education or roads or something like that.
[Guest]: So that is what is called a centrally sponsored scheme.
[Guest]: So again, from public finance literature, the objective of such a type of transfer is
[Guest]: to ensure minimum standards of services in these particular areas are met.
[Guest]: So that is the idea why union government would want to give this specific vouchers on these
[Guest]: schemes.
[Amit Varma]: So that is about centrally sponsored schemes.
[Amit Varma]: And states therefore have no option but to use the amount allocated for say Swachh Bharat
[Amit Varma]: on Swachh Bharat initiatives, they can't decide that hey, locally these issues are more important
[Amit Varma]: and therefore we will spend on these instead.
[Guest]: Yes, that's the whole problem.
[Guest]: So this the problem with centrally sponsored schemes is these are designed at the union
[Guest]: government level.
[Guest]: These are funded by the union government, but the implementation is left to the states.
[Guest]: So now is maybe the states might say, for example, Kerala might say that primary education
[Guest]: is no longer important for me because I have already hit 99% literacy rate, probably I
[Guest]: want to use the money that you're giving for something else.
[Guest]: But because you are forcing and you have this big scheme called Sarva Shaksha Abhiyan, there
[Guest]: are enough political economy interests in Kerala, which will say, yeah, let this go
[Guest]: on and we'll keep putting some money in primary education as well, though even it might not
[Amit Varma]: be my focus anymore.
[Amit Varma]: India set up as a sort of a federal state where you have different states with the independent
[Amit Varma]: budgets and they compete with each other for labor, for investment and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the intention.
[Amit Varma]: But over the years, that's, of course, been subverted and the central directs more and
[Amit Varma]: more top down, especially back in the good old days of the planning commission.
[Amit Varma]: Now with the Modi government, everyone thought that, okay, he's going to focus more on federalism,
[Amit Varma]: but the centrally sponsored schemes have just gone up.
[Amit Varma]: Why do centrally sponsored schemes keep increasing in number?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a good question.
[Guest]: So basically, this very much comes from this idea of a planned economy and that someone
[Guest]: can direct from Delhi that how should India be governed.
[Guest]: So one main reason why these schemes have taken place is because every PM wants to give
[Guest]: a stellar speech on 15th August from the ramparts of the Red Fort, announcing great new schemes.
[Guest]: What is a speech if it doesn't announce 10 new schemes, right?
[Guest]: It doesn't make cut, it's not very popular.
[Guest]: So that's the whole idea why Union governments want to announce a whole host of schemes.
[Guest]: Now, earlier in around 1969, etc, when we were in the planned period, still pretty much
[Guest]: in the planned period, that was the time when the Union government started sort of increasing
[Guest]: the number of schemes, which are called centrally sponsored schemes.
[Guest]: And consequently, the amount that the Union government can give is depending on how much
[Guest]: tax it collects, etc, right.
[Guest]: So what they did is, over the years, the Union government said that this cash component that
[Guest]: we are giving, we'll reduce that because you guys can't do much without it.
[Guest]: Instead, what we'll do is we will tell you how to spend it, we will design the schemes,
[Guest]: and then you either have to implement them or give some amount of money from your side
[Guest]: as well to run this scheme.
[Guest]: So this started proliferating, okay.
[Guest]: And apart from centrally sponsored schemes, here is one more jargon, there is something
[Guest]: called a central sector scheme.
[Guest]: So these are schemes which are run by the Union government itself, states doesn't come
[Guest]: into picture, like railways, for example, Air India, for example.
[Guest]: So combine these two central sector and centrally sponsored schemes, these sort of started taking
[Guest]: priority and these started proliferating.
[Guest]: And at one point of time, believe me, there were around 960 such schemes, okay.
[Guest]: So how can you expect a government at the Union level with as diverse states in India
[Guest]: that we have to run 960 schemes and that too by subverting what many times should have
[Guest]: been done by the state governments.
[Guest]: So this started increasing.
[Guest]: And like we always have in India, there were lots of commissions and committees set up
[Guest]: to investigate this.
[Guest]: So there is a Chaturvedi committee, there is a Sarkaria committee, there is Punchi commission,
[Guest]: all these commissions basically said the same thing, that central government can't do this,
[Guest]: you can't run so many schemes for no reason.
[Guest]: And let the state governments decide what they want to do.
[Guest]: What you need to do is there are certain critical, critical areas in which you definitely need
[Guest]: to ensure minimum standards, which I said, like health, education, these are critical
[Guest]: areas which have interstate externalities, right, the impact of those are felt across
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: So you would want Union government to fund these.
[Guest]: But apart from that, there is no reason why Union government should run a host of other
[Guest]: central sector schemes like you have Khelo India, and there is Blue Revolution and things
[Guest]: like that.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely no reason why Union government should run.
[Amit Varma]: I've never heard of the Blue Revolution.
[Guest]: What is that?
[Guest]: Blue Revolution is for fisheries.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we often use the term Maybap government for how the government relates to its people.
[Amit Varma]: But now we see that there's a level of Maybapness internally also within government.
[Amit Varma]: Central government is telling state governments, I'm your Maybap boys.
[Amit Varma]: This is your pocket money, but you got to do with it what I say.
[Amit Varma]: So you'd say that the unseen effects essentially are that the states are not able to allocate
[Amit Varma]: these resources efficiently, because the central government which has much less local information
[Amit Varma]: and incentives, wrong, you know, unaligned incentives are determining what they do with
[Guest]: the money.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's true.
[Guest]: Before going to the unseen effect, just one point I wanted to make is that the number
[Guest]: of schemes at least notionally are have decreased after all these commissions made their recommendation.
[Guest]: So two, three years back, we had 147 of them, then it came down to 66.
[Guest]: And currently the centrally sponsored schemes, not the central sector schemes are 30 in number.
[Guest]: Now how did they go about reducing this?
[Guest]: It was not that the Union government went out of these areas.
[Guest]: What they just did is they clubbed two or three schemes, gave a new name, and they said
[Guest]: this is one mega scheme.
[Guest]: So that rationalization was just a hogwash and what they just did is renaming.
[Guest]: So now we are at the current level, we have 30 schemes.
[Guest]: Now I still feel even 30 is a lot more and because the critical areas that we discussed
[Guest]: are not 30, they can do a lot lesser.
[Guest]: Now coming back to the unseen effects.
[Guest]: Yes, the first point is the requirements across states are very, very diverse.
[Guest]: So what Bihar needs is very different from what Tamil Nadu need or what Punjab needs.
[Guest]: So how is it that the Union government will be in a better position to determine what
[Guest]: is good for that particular state?
[Guest]: Isn't it better that the state governments decide what they should do?
[Guest]: I would argue not even state level, probably the local governments are the best ones to
[Guest]: determine.
[Guest]: We have some distance to go till we reach there.
[Guest]: So let's just say that at least state governments are in a much better position than the Union
[Guest]: government and hence you should do more cash transfers to the state governments and let
[Guest]: them determine what their priorities are.
[Guest]: That is one thing.
[Guest]: Another thing is a very fundamental question of the constitutionalism.
[Guest]: Now many of these schemes which we have been talking over the years actually fall in something
[Guest]: called the state list and the concurrent list in the constitution.
[Guest]: By these two lists, I mean state list explains what should be the areas in which state governments
[Guest]: have priority or state governments can act there.
[Guest]: Concurrent list is where both Union and state governments can act.
[Guest]: Now ideally you would say Union government can do a lot more in the Union list schemes
[Guest]: like defense, right, that's in the purview of the Union government.
[Guest]: But over the years, all these centrally sponsored schemes, for example, health, right, health
[Guest]: comes under a concurrent list, some parts here.
[Guest]: And that is still done by, there is a Rashtriya Swasthya Mission which is trying to do things
[Guest]: on health.
[Guest]: Education is in the purview of the state list.
[Guest]: But again there is a big centrally sponsored scheme there.
[Guest]: So the unseen effect of all this has been that all the areas which the state government
[Guest]: should have, which even the constitution determined that state governments are better place to
[Guest]: do, are being clearly subverted.
[Guest]: And there is no debate on that at all.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense the constitution itself is being subverted and therefore the intentions behind
[Amit Varma]: those specific parts of the constitution have just been thrown out of the window.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So the writ of the constitution is sort of getting subverted because of this.
[Guest]: And this has happened over the last 30-40 years.
[Guest]: So that is the problem.
[Guest]: And one big change that has happened last year and that is why this topic is of interest
[Guest]: is with what the 14th Finance Commission did.
[Guest]: What it actually did is, it increased that cash component to the states.
[Guest]: So now state governments technically have more money at their hands.
[Guest]: So now this is the right time where you can make this argument that central government
[Guest]: should just get out of some of the big, big things that it is doing and try to do things
[Guest]: which are much more concentrated.
[Guest]: Now here one important data point I want to add is, it is not that as countries become
[Guest]: richer, governments start spending lesser.
[Guest]: For example, there is a very strong correlation between GDP per capita and the percentage
[Guest]: of government spending in your economy.
[Guest]: For example, US governments, all levels combined, spend a lot more than Indian government does.
[Guest]: And Sweden does a lot more than US does.
[Guest]: Around 60% of their GDP is just by the government, can you believe it?
[Guest]: So that is a given, that will happen.
[Guest]: But the way they do is, as you become richer, governments and particularly the union governments
[Guest]: start reducing the areas in which they operate and they focus on just social security, health,
[Guest]: education for example, treatment of the elderly etc. and put in a lot of money in there so
[Guest]: that you ensure minimum standards that are met.
[Guest]: Now that is what we want India to get to.
[Amit Varma]: And you would say if you want the money to be spent more efficiently, you get it as local
[Amit Varma]: as possible to the state government or even beyond to local governments or you just get
[Amit Varma]: it directly to individuals who know their priorities the best.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So that's where we come to universal basic income.
[Guest]: Think of it, we were talking about cash transfer to the state government, UBI is just an extension
[Guest]: that it is a cash transfer directly to the individual, like you said.
[Guest]: So now that there is this argument for UBI, the best way to do about is cut a lot of these
[Guest]: centrally sponsored schemes where not only is the cost of you selecting people, but employing
[Guest]: people to select these people and then give them money is a lot more.
[Guest]: So the better argument is yeah, you give them a universal basic income and then let them
[Amit Varma]: decide what they deem is best for them.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the logics for the UBI is that you cut off all other spending and then you
[Amit Varma]: empower individuals by giving them the UBI, but that will never happen in India, right?
[Guest]: Spending never gets cut, essentially.
[Guest]: Spending does, yeah, it's always a political economy question, there will be entrance interest,
[Guest]: it is difficult.
[Guest]: But for example, the big three subsidies at the union government level are food, fertilizer
[Guest]: and petroleum.
[Guest]: Now over the last one or two years, there has been a decrease in the subsidy levels
[Guest]: of all three.
[Guest]: So there are pathways in which you can do, for example, they did this give it up thing,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I don't know how many people subscribed it, but they did show that the subsidy which was
[Guest]: being availed out of this did get reduced.
[Guest]: So that is the way you would have to go.
[Guest]: And some of these things can just be done today if the government decides.
[Guest]: For example, fertilizer subsidy is not given to the farmer, it is given to the company
[Guest]: which manufactures fertilizer.
[Guest]: Now there is absolutely no reason why the government can take it off.
[Guest]: Of course, it will be politically unpopular.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, that's the tough call.
[Guest]: Why not just give the cash to the farmer and let him decide what his priorities are.
[Guest]: That is what UBI would do.
[Guest]: So if you want to protect the farmer, why are you taking such an indirect route helping
[Guest]: a company and then company manufacturing, absolutely inefficient way of doing it.
[Amit Varma]: So at this point, I'll take a slight digression before I ask my next question.
[Amit Varma]: If you go over to Pragati, the magazine that both Pranay and I work for at thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and you go to the reforms 2.0 section, you'll find a piece on exactly this by Pranay, where
[Amit Varma]: he argues that centrally sponsored schemes should be reduced to 10.
[Amit Varma]: Because that's a manageable number that takes care of all the core areas in which you need
[Amit Varma]: to ensure that stuff happens.
[Amit Varma]: Besides that, what other immediate suggestions do you have which are immediately implementable
[Amit Varma]: in practical terms?
[Guest]: In the context of centrally sponsored government schemes?
[Guest]: Yeah, one thing that if they don't want to reduce the number of schemes, one thing they
[Guest]: can do and the government has been talking about it is make them outcome oriented as
[Guest]: in focus a lot more on what is the outcome achieved out of this spending.
[Guest]: And according to that, you give the next tranche of money.
[Guest]: Currently, it happens, it's just on utilization.
[Guest]: So if you are a state and you have utilized all your money, you can apply for another
[Guest]: round of funds.
[Guest]: So some states have mastered the art of utilization, without bothering about how much of an impact
[Guest]: it is having.
[Guest]: So one way to in the short term to reform the centrally sponsored scheme is just to
[Guest]: have outcome monitoring and ensure that this money is spent on what it is supposed to be
[Amit Varma]: spent on.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay, it was a pleasure talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: And before I end this episode, I want to leave with specific good wishes for you.
[Amit Varma]: I hope one of these days you get a call from the PMO and they tell you that, listen, we
[Amit Varma]: have a new centrally sponsored government scheme and we are putting you in charge.
[Amit Varma]: And when you ask what that scheme is, they'll say it's RCGSS, Reduce Centrally Government
[Amit Varma]: Schemes Abhiyan.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for coming on the show, Pranay.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit.
[Amit Varma]: To read more about Pranay's thoughts on this, head on over to our magazine Pragati at thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Go to the Reforms 2.0 section and search for an article by Pranay titled 10 Little Schemes.
[Amit Varma]: And as for all of you sick of listening to my bad dreams, fine, I'll give you a break.
[Amit Varma]: Next week, I'm going to read out a song instead.
[Unknown]: Next week on The Seen and The Unseen, Amit Verma will be talking to Madhu Menon about
[Unknown]: restaurant regulations.
[Unknown]: For more, go to seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and The Unseen, check out another great show by IVM
[Amit Varma]: Podcasts, Made in India, hosted by my friend May Thomas, where every week she profiles
[Amit Varma]: up and coming independent Indian bands.
[Unknown]: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, this is your captain speaking.
[Unknown]: Sorry to say, but there's been a slight delay due to the apocalypse having suddenly begun.
[Unknown]: As you can see, there's death, destruction and chaos taking place all around us.
[Unknown]: But don't you worry, food and drinks will be served shortly.
[Unknown]: And I would recommend checking out IVM Podcasts to get some of your favorite Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: We'll keep you going till this whole thing blows over.
[Unknown]: Thank you.